Ferrero, Felice. The Valley of Aosta, a Descriptive and Historical Sketch of an Alpine Valley Noteworthy in Story and in Monument. New York: Putnam, 1910. http://archive.org/details/valleyofaostades00ferr.

iii "Such a trip must be made on purpose, for the valley is not on a main international line of transit; it is, however, a journey easy to make, since the valley is not far from important cities, like Milan and Turin"
iv "During the second half of July and the whole of August, the period of Italian school and business vacations, hotels are crowded, coaches and mules hard to get, the guides pre-empted, so that one sometimes pays with discomfort for the good weather. "
"Both cattle and men go through a sort of periodical internal migration that, from season to season, entirely changes the appearance of the valley. As soon as fair spring weather comes, the cows are hurried up to the high pastures, away to the edges of the glaciers and the permanent snows. Wherever there is a little patch of verdure, even though the elevation and the short summers do not allow of its growing more than an inch or two out of the ground, the cows graze happily on the most aromatic of forage; the butter and cheese industry [continues four, five, six thousand feet above the level of winter quarters.]"
v "By the end of September, the homeward migration is completed and the villages--half deserted during the summer by their population, which is partly gone to the heights with the cattle and partly to the cities in search of work--are again teeming with life and activity"

74-75 "We said that the Gran Paradiso is a guarded retreat for its four-footed inhabitant. This is not absolutely true, because the chamois, which are plentiful, are only partially protected by a restricted hunting period. It is the ibex that is entirely safeguarded by the unconditional prohibition of the hunt in any form, at any time; only the kings of Italy, who are in a legal sense the owners and keepers of the game, are allowed the privilege of shooting at ibex, but they make very discreet and infrequent use of it."
75 "The Gran Paradiso is the last stand of the ibex among European mountains. It once roamed about in great numbers in the highest regions of the whole system pf the Alps, and even as recently as fifty years ago there were enough left to permit free hunting; but their dominions have been so quickly reduced with the appearance of tourists in the Alps, that only severe vigilance can preserve their last haunts from devastation and their race from extermination. At present, the number of ibex is calculated at about six hundred head; for their protection are deputed some forty royal guardacaccia (hunting guards) stationed at Cogne."
75-76 "The ibex is a graceful creature, rather large and extraordinarily vigorous, about four feet in height to the bottom of the horns. Though similarity makes it a close companion of the chamois the ibex is quite another animal in appearance as well as natural affinity; while the chamois is an antelope (_Capella rupicapra_, Erx.), the ibex is a goat (_Capra ibex_, L.) and wears the typical chinbeard of the goat. The chamois is tamer and often descendsin winter to mingle with the sheep, but the ibex is never seen below its own fastnesses, remote and high."
76 "Wonderful tales are told of this rare animal: that when a year oldhe can jump the height of a man from a standstill; that he stands erect, snuffing, exhilarated, in the hardest storms of the Alps; that when old, he commits suicide by dashing himself over a precipice; that he jumps from high rocks upon his horns as springs; that he goes blind if he cannot keep within sight of ice. All of which may or may not be true, but are hard, indeed impossible to verify, considering the extreme difficulty of reaching the ibex within distance allowing observatio. Admirably swift across glaciers and up steep mountain sides, incredibly sure-footed on ice and bad rock, unsurpoassedly [agile in clearing wide crevasses at a jump, the ibex undoubtedly is--and he is so shy and keen-scented that man rarely gets a glimpse of him.] "
77 "The ibex at any rate, is the chief cause of the notoriety of the Gran Paradiso and the valleys leading to it--Val Cogne and Val Savarenche; to it also, though more directly to King Victor Emanuel II's fondness for hunting it, those valleys and those mountains owe a net of splendid hunting paths, crossing in all directions, reaching to great heights, and ending in the permanent camps used by the king. If getting into those valleys is uncomfortable work, once in, the traveller can roam at ease where in other valleys he would be toiling along pathless ravines--at ease,-- taht is, provided he does not carry a gun!"

Tschudi, Dr. Freidrich von. _Das Tierleben in der Alpenwelt_. Leipzig, Weber 1872 531 ff. on legends about ibex behaviour
Simlerii, J. _Vallesiae et Alpium Descriptio_. Elzevir, 1633, 336, on them roaming over the whole Alpine range on the craziest of those
Aubert, Édouard. _La Vallée d'Aoste_. Paris, Amyot, 1860, 83, on ibex still roaming highest regions of the Alps in the 1860s
