Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2011-05-03T10:25:07+02:00

====== Going Digital ======
2011/03/15 //

If you are just getting started with online research, there are some
things that are handy to know, and a few tools you might like to set up
for yourself.

/Analog and digital/.  When I talk to my students about the difference
between analog and digital representations, I use the example of two
clocks.  The first is the kind that has hour and minute hands, and
perhaps one for seconds, too.  At some point you learned how to tell
time on an analog clock, and it may have seemed difficult.  Since the
clock takes on every value in between two times, telling time involves a
process of measurement. You say, “it’s about 3:15,” but the time changes
continuously as you do so.  Telling time with a digital clock, by
contrast, doesn’t require you to do more than read the value on the
display.  It is 3:15 until the clock says it is 3:16.  Digital
representations can only take on one of a limited (although perhaps very
large) number of states.  Not every digital representation is
electronic.  Writing is digital, too, in the sense that there are only a
finite number of characters, and instances of each are usually
interchangeable.  You can print a book in a larger font, or in Braille,
without changing the meaning.  Salvador Dalí’s melting clocks, however,
would keep different time–which was the point, of course.

/The costs are different/.  Electronic digital information can be
duplicated at near-zero cost, transmitted at the speed of light, stored
in infinitesimally small volumes, and created, processed and consumed by
machines.  This means that ideas that were more-or-less serviceable in
the world before networked computers–ideas about value, property rights,
communication, creativity, intelligence, governance and many other
aspects of society and culture–are now up for debate.  The emergence of
new rights regimes (such as open access
<http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/overview.htm>, open content
<http://creativecommons.org/> and open source
<http://www.opensource.org/osd.html>) and the explosion of new
information are manifestations of these changing costs.

/You won’t be able to read everything/.  Estimates of the amount of new
information that is now created annually are staggering (2003
<http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-much-info-2003/>,
2009 <http://hmi.ucsd.edu/howmuchinfo_research_report_consum.php>).  As
you become more skilled at finding online sources, you will discover
that new material on your topic appears online much faster than you can
read it.  The longer you work on something, the more behind you will
get.  This is OK, because everyone faces this issue whether they realize
it or not.  In traditional scholarship, scarcity was the problem: travel
to archives was expensive, access to elite libraries was gated,
resources were difficult to find, and so on.  In digital scholarship,
abundance is the problem.  What is worth your attention or your trust?

/Assume that what you want is out there, and that you simply need to
locate it/.  I first found this advice in Thomas Mann’s excellent
/Oxford Guide to Library Research
<http://www.amazon.com/Oxford-Guide-Library-Research/dp/0195189981/>/.
 Although Mann’s book focuses primarily on pre-digital scholarship, his
strategies for finding sources are more relevant than ever.  Don’t
assume that you are the best person for the job, either.  Ask a
librarian for help.  You’ll find that they tend to be nicer, better
informed, more helpful and more tech savvy <http://code4lib.org/> than
the people you usually talk to about your work.  Librarians work
constantly on your behalf to solve problems related to finding and
accessing information.

/The first online tool you should master is the search engine/.  The
vast majority of people think that they can type a word or two into
Google and choose something from the first page of millions of results.
 If they don’t see what they’re looking for, they try a different
keyword or give up.  When I talk to scholars who aren’t familiar with
digital research, their first assumption is often that there aren’t any
good online resources for their subject.  A little bit of guided digging
often shows them that this is far from the truth.  So how do you use
search engines more effectively?  First of all, sites have an advanced
search page that lets you focus in on your topic, exclude search terms,
weight some terms more than others, limit your results to particular
kinds of document, to particular sites, to date ranges, and so on.
Second, different search engines introduce different kinds of bias by
ranking results differently, so you get a better view when you routinely
use more than one.  Third, all of the major search engines keep
introducing new features, so you have to keep learning new skills.
 Research technique is something you *practice*, not something you have.

/Links are the currency of the web/.  Links make it possible to navigate
from one context to another with a single click.  For human users, this
greatly lowers the transaction costs of comparing sources.  The link is
abstract enough to serve as means of navigation and able to subsume
traditional scholarly activities like footnoting, citation, glossing and
so on.  Furthermore, extensive hyperlinking allows readers to follow
nonlinear and branching paths through texts.  What many people don’t
realize is that links are constantly being navigated by a host of
artificial users, colorfully known as spiders, bots or crawlers. A
computer program downloads a webpage, extracts all of the links and
other content on it, and follows each new link in turn, downloading the
pages that it encounters along the way.  This is where search engine
results come from: the ceaseless activity of millions of automated
computer programs that constantly remake a dynamic and incomplete map of
the web.  It has to be this way, because there is no central authority.
 Anyone can add stuff to the web or remove it without consulting anyone
else.

/The web is not structured like a ball of spaghetti/.  Research done
with web spiders has shown that a lot of the most interesting
information to be gleaned from digital sources lies in the hyperlinks
leading into and out of various nodes, whether personal pages,
documents, archives, institutions, or what have you. Search engines
provide some rudimentary tools for mapping these connections, but much
more can be learned with more specialized tools.  Some of the most
interesting structure is to be found in social networks, because…

/Emphasis is shifting from a web of pages to a web of people/.  Sites
like Blogger, WordPress, Twitter, Facebook, Flickr and YouTube put the
emphasis on the contributions of individual people and their
relationships to one another.  Social searching and social
recommendation tools allow you to find out what your friends or
colleagues are reading, writing, thinking about, watching, or listening
to.  By sharing information that other people find useful, individuals
develop reputation and change their own position in social networks.
 Some people are bridges between different communities, some are hubs in
particular fields, and many are lonely little singletons with one
friend.  This is very different from the broadcast world, where there
were a few huge hubs spewing to a thronging multitude (known as “the
audience <http://www.goodreads.com/quote/show/105085>“).

Ready to jump in?  Here are some things you might try.

*Customize a browser to make it more useful for research*

 1. Install Firefox <http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/personal.html>
 2. Add some search extensions
     1. Worldcat <http://www.worldcat.org/toolbars/default.jsp>
     2. Internet Archive
        <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/14434>
     3. Project Gutenberg
        <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/9173>
     4. Merriam-Webster
        <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/4609>
 3. Pull down the search icon and choose “Manage Search Engines” -> “Get
    more search engines” then search for add-ons within Search Tools
 4. Try search refinement
     1. Install the Deeper Web
        <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/10187> add-on
        and try using tag clouds to refine your search
     2. /Example/.  Suppose you are trying to find out more about a
        nineteenth-century missionary named Adam Elliot
        <http://www.biographi.ca/009004-119.01-e.php?&id_nbr=4970>.  If
        you try a basic Google search, you will soon discover there is
        an Australian animator with the same name.  Try using Deeper Web
        to find pages on the missionary.
 5. Add bookmarks for advanced search pages to the bookmark toolbar
     1. Google Books <http://books.google.com/advanced_book_search>
        (note that you can set to “full view only” or “full view and
        preview”
     2. Historic News
        <http://news.google.com/archivesearch/advanced_search>
        (experiment with the timeline view)
     3. Internet Archive <http://www.archive.org/advancedsearch.php>
     4. Hathi Trust <http://catalog.hathitrust.org/>
     5. Flickr Commons <http://www.flickr.com/commons> (try limiting by
        license)
     6. Wolfram Alpha <http://www.wolframalpha.com/> (try “China
        population”)
     7. Google Ngram Viewer <http://ngrams.googlelabs.com/>
 6. You can block sites
    <http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/03/hide-sites-to-find-more-of-what-you.html>
    that have low quality results

*Work with citations*

 1. Install Zotero <http://www.zotero.org/>
     1. Try grabbing a record from the Amazon <http://www.amazon.com/>
        database
     2. Use Zotero to make a note of stuff you find using Search Inside
        <http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/browse/-/10197021> on your
        book
     3. Under the info panel in Zotero, use the Locate button to find a
        copy in a library near you
     4. From the WorldCat page, try looking for related works and saving
        a whole folder of records in Zotero
     5. Find the book in a library and save the catalog information as a
        page snapshot
     6. Go into Google Books, search for full view only, download
        metadata and attach PDF
 2. Learn more
    <http://lifehacker.com/#!5463293/how-to-clip-sort-and-cite-the-entire-web-with-zotero>
    about Zotero
 3. Explore other options for bibliographic work (e.g. Mendeley
    <http://www.mendeley.com/>)
http://www.wizfolio.com/ 

*Find repositories of digital sources on your topic*

Here are a few examples for various kinds of historical research.

 1. Canada
     1. Canadiana.org <http://www.canadiana.org/>
     2. Dictionary of Canadian Biography online
        <http://www.biographi.ca/index-e.html>
     3. Repertory of Primary Source Databases
        <http://www.thenhier.ca/en/content/repertory-primary-source-databases>
     4. Our Roots <http://www.ourroots.ca/>
     5. British Columbia Digital Library
        <http://bcdlib.tc.ca/general-collections-canada.html>
     6. Centre for Contemporary Canadian Art <http://www.ccca.ca/>
 2. US
     1. Library of Congress Digital Collections
        <http://www.loc.gov/library/libarch-digital.html>
     2. American Memory <http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/index.html>
     3. NARA <http://www.archives.gov/index.html>
     4. Calisphere <http://www.calisphere.universityofcalifornia.edu/>
     5. NYPL Digital Projects <http://www.nypl.org/online_projects>
 3. UK and Europe
     1. Perseus Digital Library <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/>
     2. UK National Archives <http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/>
     3. Old Bailey Online <http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/>
     4. London Lives <http://www.londonlives.org/>
     5. Connected Histories
        <http://www.history.ac.uk/projects/connected-histories>
     6. British History Online
        <http://www.british-history.ac.uk/Default.aspx>
     7. British Newspapers 1800-1900 <http://newspapers.bl.uk/blcs/>
     8. English Broadside Ballad Archive
        <http://emc.english.ucsb.edu/ballad_project/>
     9. EuroDocs <http://eudocs.lib.byu.edu/index.php/Main_Page>
    10. Europeana <http://europeana.eu/portal/>
    11. The European Library
        <http://search.theeuropeanlibrary.org/portal/en/index.html>
    12. Gallica <http://gallica.bnf.fr/?&lang=EN>
 4. Thematic (e.g., history of science and medicine)
     1. Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online
        <http://darwin-online.org.uk/>
     2. Darwin Correspondence Project <http://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/home>
     3. National Library of Medicine Digital Projects
        <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/onlineexhibitions.html>

*Capture some RSS feeds*

 1. Install the Sage <https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/77>
    RSS feed reader in Firefox (lots of other possibilities, like Google
    Reader <http://www.google.com/reader/>)
     1. Go to H-Net <http://www.h-net.org/lists/> and choose one or more
        lists to monitor; drag the RSS icons to the Sage panel and edit
        properties
     2. Go to Google News <http://news.google.com/> and create a search
        that you’d like to monitor; drag RSS to Sage panel and edit
        properties
     3. Go to Hot New Releases in Expedition and Discovery
        <http://www.amazon.com/gp/new-releases/books/3825131/ref=pd_nr_b_nav>
        at Amazon and subscribe to RSS feed
 2. Consider signing up for Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/>, following
    a lot of colleagues and aggregating their interests with Tweeted
    Times <http://tweetedtimes.com/> (this is how Digital Humanities Now
    <http://digitalhumanitiesnow.org/> works)

*Discover some new tools*

 1. The best place to start is Lisa Spiro’s Digital Research Tools wiki
    <https://digitalresearchtools.pbworks.com/>

Categories Method <http://en.wordpress.com/tag/method/>


      No comments /Comments are closed/.

  *


        Projects

      o Criminal Intent <http://criminalintent.org/> Text mining the Old
        Bailey
      o Digital History Hacks (2005-08)
        <http://digitalhistoryhacks.blogspot.com/> Methodology for the
        infinite archive
      o GitHub <https://github.com/williamjturkel> Some code I’m sharing
      o NiCHE <http://niche-canada.org/> Network in Canadian History &
        Environment
      o Programming Historian
        <http://niche-canada.org/programming-historian> Python coding
        for humanists
      o UWO Webpage <http://history.uwo.ca/faculty/turkel> I teach history
  *


    Creative Commons License
    <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/>

  *


        Recent

      o Bits from Bytes Darwin RepRap
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/04/19/bits-from-bytes-darwin-reprap/>
      o Building MakerBot 00018
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/04/18/building-makerbot-00018/>
      o Measure and Refactor Constantly
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/04/05/measure-refactor/>
      o Write and Cluster Small Texts
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/04/04/write-and-cluster/>
      o Burst Documents for Fine-Grained Matching
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/03/27/burst-documents/>
      o Spider to Collect Sources
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/03/22/spider-to-collect-sources/>
      o Going Digital <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/03/15/going-digital/>
      o Make Local Copies of Everything
        <http://williamjturkel.net/2011/03/07/make-local-copies/>

  *


        Categories

      o Making <http://williamjturkel.net/category/making/>
      o Method <http://williamjturkel.net/category/method/>

Blog at WordPress.com <http://wordpress.com/?ref=footer>. | Theme: Wu
Wei <http://theme.wordpress.com/themes/wu-wei/> by Jeff Ngan
<http://equivocality.com>.
Back to the top <#top>
[feedly mini]
