Dennert & Pape

FA 006/0446
Ponts et chausses
Departement des Bouches-du-Rhone
Service Special Maritime
M. Batard-Razelière
Ingeniéur en Chef
Cabine: Hotel des Services Publics
Quai de la Joliette

Marseille 17 mai 1902

"les variations du niveau de la mer a Monaco sont, a tres peu de chose près, les memes qu'á Marseille"
"l'appareil devrait inscrire les variations en double comme celui del MArseille"
"En un mot, le marigraphe de Monaco serait exactement semblable á celui que vous avez fourni pour le port de Marseille. 
Il y aurait seulement quelques modifications á apporter á la varme (?) en bronze placée á l'origine de la galerie de communication du puits avec la mer; mais ces modifications ne sont pas encore anetees (?) et n'influeraient pas d'ailleurs sensiblement sur le cout (cond?) total de l'installation."

Reitz an Ch Lallemand, ingenieur au Corps des Mines
Hamburg 29. Mai 1884

"Die einliegenden 5 Durchzeichnungen (mit blau geschriebenen Ziffern bezeichnet) sollten einige Bemerkungen illustrieren die ich noch über die Aufstellung des Mareographen und die Anbringung der Führungsschienen im Schachte zu machen hätte.
Auf Blatt 3 ist die Führungsschiene (von denen 3 nach Ihrem entwurf angebracht werden sollten) im Durchschnitt in wirklicher Grösse aufgezeichnet. Es wäre nothwendig dass diese Schiene sehr genau wie die Zeichnung es angiebt ausgeführt und im Schacht angebracht würde. 
Hinsichtlich der Säule, welche den Apparat trägt, zu gebenden Aufstellung giebt Blatt 4 die nöthingen Daten. Die Entfernung des Mittelpunktes des Schachtes vom Mittelpunkt der Säule 792,8 (192,8) Millimeter müsste besonders genau eingehalten werden. Die Längenaxe der Bodenplatte des Apparates ist der Achse AB (PI der erhaltenen Zeichnungen des Gebäudes) parallel und in einem Abstande von 67 Millimeter von dieser Axe wie es auf Blatt 4 dargestellt ist. Die Verbindungslinie der Bolzen _ef_ ist ebenfalls parallel der Axe AB des Gebäudes.
Auf Blatt 5 ist der Fuss der den Apparat tragenden Säule in wirklicher Grösse im Durchschnitt durch die Mitte gegeben. Die Mittere der sich gegenüberstehende Bolzenlöcher sind 287 Millimeter von einenander entfernt; der Durchmesser dieser Bolzenlöcher beträgt 22 Millimeter.
Ich glaubte anfänglich man würde, den hohen Anförderungen entsprechend, welche Sie zu Recht in dieser Sache überall zur Geltung bringen, die Säule des Apparates direct durch eine auf dem Boden des unteren Raumes des Gebäudes stehende Säule unterstützen müssen wie ich dies auf Blatt 2 in Roth angedeutet habe. _g_ sollte eine gusseiserne Säule vorstellen auf welche der Fuss der Säule des Apparates aufgeschraubt würde. Mir scheint nun aber bei näherer Prüfung der Zeichnungen das Gebäude in sich sehr fest zu sein so dass man von der genannten Säule _g_ absehen könnte. Nur wäre in f Blatt 1 u. 2 ein etwas breitere Steinplatte anzubringen worauf der Säulenfuss seine Stellung fände.
Die in dieser Steinplatte zu schlagende Löcher müssten, wenn sie vor Ankunft des Apparats in Marseille schon ausgeführt werden sollten, recht genau nach der Zeichnung Blatt 4 abgemessen werden.
(Ob nun das Gewölbe von Blatt 2 die genügende Festigkeit hat eine Sicherheit für die Unveranderlichkeit der Höhenlage des Apparates darzubieten, darüber werden die dortige Herrn Ingenieure wwohl entscheiden. Man kann aus den übersandten Zeichnungen sich nicht vollständig instruiren. Es scheint dass das ganze Gebäude auf Felsen steht doch bin ich hierüber nicht ganz sicher.)
Die Fabrik von Weiller in Angouleme hat Silicium-Bronze-Draht gescickt. Es schein ein sehr schönes Fabrikat zu sein; ich werde mir erlauben Ihnen eine Probe davon einzusenden."

Kosten des Marseill Apparat, einschliesslich Nebenkosten: 10450 francs

FA 006/0445 GF Kopien?

Ministere des Travaux Publics. nivellemen General de la France
Maregraphe de Marseille
Appareil enregistreur totalisateur (1884)
Flotteur

Fluthmesser System-F.-H. Reitz

Mareograph für Marseille. Dispositionsskizze nach Mauss
Hauptdimensionen des Mareographs für den Hafen Marseille

Skizze des neuen Fluthmessers Hamburg 1. Juni 1896

Fluthmesser Gebäude in Cadiz ?

FA 006/0448 Auschreibungsunterlagen für einen Pegel-Wassermesser auf der kaiserlichn Werft in Wilhelmshaven, mit technische Zeichnungen u. Katalog der allgemeinen Ausschreibungsbedingungen.

Proposals accepted until January 3, 1907. Drawings for docks 4,5,6

FA 006/0826 Korrespondenz mit Partner- und Konkurrenzfirmen zu Wasser-Pegelmessern 1913

R.Fuess, Berlin-Steglitz 9 Dez. 1924 an Dennert&Pape
"Ferner stelle ich noch instrumente zum Messen des Wasserstandes in offenen Wasserläufen her. Ich überreiche beiliegend eine Karte, die die gängisten Pegelkonstruktionen enthält und bitte, evtl. hiernach Ihre Auswahl treffen zu wollen.
Leider kann ich mit Preisangaben über Pegelapparate nicht dienen, da diese abhängig sind von den örtlichen Verhältnissen. z.B. müsste ich vorher wissen:
1) wie gross sind die aufzuzeichenden Wasserstände,
2) erfolgt die Aufstellung des Pegelapparates unmittelbar über der Messstelle, oder in einiger Entfernung
3) in welchem Masstab sollen die Aufzeichnungen stattfinden, 1:1, 1:10, 1:20 usw.)"
Signed

FA 006/0321 Patentschrift. Englische Patenturkunde für ein Pegel- und Flutmesser auf den Namen Joh. Chr. Dennert und Georg Gustav Lind GB2367/1881 "Improvements in water-meters also applicable to water-motors". Erster integrierender Flutmesser in Cadiz

Ott/Kempten FS-gen

A. Ott Kempten Allgäu, Gegründet 1873
Grosse Schreibpegel mit vertikaler Trommel
Liste 251 (auszug aus liste 201)

Seit 14 Ueber die Aufstellung von Schreibpegeln

"Der Schwimmer darf nicht direkt in fließendes oder sonst unruhiges Wasser tauchen, sondern ist in einem Rohr oder Schacht unterzubringen, in dem sich die Wasserspiegelschwankungen ohne Wellenbewegungen ausgleichen. Je kleiner das Verhältnis zwischend den Einlaßquerschnitt und dem Querschnitt der Schwimmerkammer ist, desto besser ist die Dämpfung. Diese Verhältnis soll höchstens gleich 1:200, besser aber gleich 1:1000 oder noch kleiner sein. "

"Es ist dringend anzuraten, in der Nähe des Schreibpegels einen Lattenpegel aufzustellen, damit der Registrierapparat bequem kontrolliert werden kann."



Télélimnimètres Télélimnigraphes électriques à courant intermittent de A. Ott. Notice 283a
Edition del Firme Ott, Kempten-Bavière

The technology for mareographes and limnographes is essentially the same (flotteur, apparat, etc.) Ott seems to focus on the measurement of enclosed waters, not much relationship to Normalnull

FA 006/0885
Pegel del Bauart Seibt-Fuess und andere wasserbautechnische Meßapparate
R. Fuess, vormals J.G. Greigner Jr. und Geissler
Steglitz bei Berlin 1911

FA 006/0447
Fluth-Apparat System F.H. Reitz Hamburg
ausgeführt von Dennert & Pape, Altona
Ausgestellt vom Königlich Preussischen Geodätischen Institut in der Ausstellung wissenschaftlicher Apparate zu London 1876
Tide-Apparatus
at the Loan Exhibition of Scientifica Apparatus, London 1876
(in German and English)

2. "The determination of the form and dimensions of the Earth, problem of the European committee for higher geodetical purposes[Europäische Erdmessung] (remeasuring degrees of longitude and latitude) also contains the determination of the mean height of the sea on the points of different coasts and its comparison by means of accurate levellings. During the last few years the Committee has endeavoured in consequence of these examination to study the different apparatus and to promote a more exact observation of the tide resembling the exact levellings taken recently.

These circumstances were the cause of a commission by His Excellency General Baeyer, President of the Central - Office of the European committee for higher geodetical purposes and the Royal Prussian Geodetic Institution [Königlich Preußischen Geodätischen Institut] to the undersigned [F.H. Reitz] to induce him to prepare a tide-apparatus according to his system. This instrument, now exhibited in the Loan Exhibition of Scientific Apparatus in London is made by Dennert&Pape of Altona, the Clock-Works by"
3. "Theodor Knoblich in Hamburgh. It is intended by the Imperial German Admiralty to place this new instrument, after the close of the exhibition on the Isle of Sylt in Schleswig.
The commission given by His Excellency General B. concerning the new instrument was intended for a Registering-Apparatus and the mechanical determination of the mean height of the sea by means of a new invention (1871) by the undersigned. The apparatus here described is therefore a combination of both objects as follows, in the simplest way.
A buoy A moved up and down by the tide in a vertical pit turns a disk C by means of a copper-wire B. with a horizontal axle-tree. During the ebb, the wire B draws down and turns the disk C; during the flood the same is effected in the opposite direction by a weight D turning the disk E connected with the disk C upon the same axle-tree. In order to reduce the" 
4. "movement of the buoy A, in a certain proportion, a little cog-wheel F on the axle of the disk C and F moves a cog-bar G in a horizontal direction. On one end of G a diamond point H is fixed, on the other end two rollers J with horizontal axle.
The Clock of the instrument turns the cylinder round its axis in 24 hours by means of a combination of wheels and the glass disk M in 6 hours. The tide-curves are engraved upon the cylinder L with the diamond-point H. The rollers J move on the glass-disk M. by the combined action of the buoy A, the weight D and"
5. "the clock-works.
Respecting the specialties of the mechanical performance the following things should be observed.
All the different parts of the apparatus are fixed upon the same plate N of cast iron, planed (?) on the necessary points to insure a most invariable position of them. The plate N rests on three columns of cast iron placed upon the borer of the pit. The cylinder is covered with blackened chalk-paper whereon the diamond engraves the flood-curves as white fine lines on the black paper.
The paper on the cylinder L is divided in half hours and from meter to meter of height. For this purpose a proper selfacting apparatus is constructed, by which both divisions are made with great exactness and invariableness. Diamond-points are used for this purpose also. It is necessary for the sake of distinctness to renew teh covering paper of the cylinder once a month. To avoid waste of time for the drawing of the tide-curves a second quite equal cylinder is prepared and carefully divided"
6. "to replace the former cylinder.
For the observation of the constants of the apparatus is is necessary to note complete revolutions of the disk C and glass-disk M. For this purpose two indices are applied.
The circumfrence of the disk C measured on the axis of the copper-wire B is exactly two meter long.
The apparatus for the determination of the mean height of the sea is explained by the following remarks.
It is the question how to define evenly the mean height of the water for a certain period.
This height would be the arthmetical mean between high- and low-water, supposing a regular form of the tide-curves. In fact the real observed tide-curves differ very much from this theoretically defined"
7. "regular form (sinus-line). To show this the tide-curves of Cuxhaven, Southhampton and Ipswich will suffice as examples. The irregularities in these curves are evident nd easily to be seen in figure 2, where in the sinus-line is drawn for the purpose.
If the difference between high- and low-water is named h, the mean height is for Cuxhaven 0,527 h, for Southhampton 0,567 h and for Ipswich 0,441 h, instead of 0,5 h., the amount of mean height supposing a regular form of the curve.
The mean height of the sea [die mittlere Höhe des Meeres] is one of the most important results of the tide observations. It is the only scale to define the invariableness or the measure of the variation in height of the continent and islands. It would serve also to determine whether"
8. "the quantity of water is increasing or decreasing; to be discovered perhaps by a general observation of this fact on a great number of points on the coasts.
The line of mean height a c g i must be in such a position, that the figures abc and gfi (fig 2 pag 7) get the same area with cdge. This is to be found by a tedious calculation of area by the tide curves drawn on the cylinder L.
The apparatus here described gives the requisite dates for an easy determination of the mean height by means of two rollers (J) (one of the controlling the other) moved by the various stands of the water on a disk of glass (M). This disk is turned round its axis by the clock-works in 6 hours. The axis of the rollers J is parallel to the direction of their motion on the disk M. The number of the revolutions of the rollers is noted in certain periods by means of the divided margin (the margin is divided in 100 parts, tenth are estimated) and a numerical-apparatus going till 100."
9. "The height of the water maay be taken from the point, when the roller J stands in the centre of the disk M.  
If the height of the water taken from this point be x and 1/n the diminution of the movement of the buoy by the little wheel F, how easily to be seen 
(1.) Sx/nDq = 1/n SxDq
is the expression for the movement of a point in the circumference of the roller J in a period during which the disk M revolves equal to the arc q
The expression SxDq is the area"
10. "of a figure with the ordinates x and basis q (x represents the height of the water and q the time) The mean x or the height of a rectngle of equal size with this figure and the basis q is found with q by division. This mean x is the mean height to be found. If this mean height be called m; it is according to expression (1.)
(2.) m = (n×1/nSxDq)/q
The movement of a point of the circumference of the roller J is equal to 1/nSxDq. This is equal to the product of the circumference of the roller J called p and the difference of notices made on the margin of the roller J at the beginning and end of the period. Therefore it is, if the notices are called a1 and a2
(3.) m= [np(a2-a1)]/q
If z is the number of seconds corresponding to the arc q and b the"
11. "constant arc the disk M revolves in a second it is 
(4.) m= np/b (a2-a1)/z
finally if np/b = c 
(I.) m = [c(a2-a1)]/z
the mean height of the sea.
The single constant c is easily to be determined by experiment and also with great exactness, without the knowledge of the dimensions of the apparatu, as follows. In a certain position of the roller J a number of revolutions is made by the disk M, representing a number of seconds z 1 (a revolution is made in 21600 seconds). At the beginning and end of these revolutions the stand of the roller J is noted (equal a1 and a2). After this a certain length (l) of the copper wire upon the disk C is unrolled (measured by means of the circumference of the disk C, equal 2 meter, and the index, or directly). In the new position of the roller J a number of revolutions of the disk M again is made, representing a certain number of seconds (z2) and also the corresponding two notices (a3 and a4) of the stand of the roller at the beginning and end of these revolutions are now"
12. "observed. All the requisite dates for the determination of c are now observed. If the two m corresponding with the two positions of the rollerare m1 and m2 their difference is equal l, according to equation (I.)
m1= c(a2-a1)/z1 and m2=c(a4-a3)/z2
therefore m2-m1=l=c[(a4-a3)/z2-(a2-a1)/z1] finally
(II.) c= l/[(a4-a3)/z2-(a2-a1)/z1]
When the constant c for both rollers is calculated, the constant difference in the results for m is fixed by a number of revolutions of the disk M in the same position of the rollers. The difference of m found in this way of course is constant.
The equations I for the apparatus exhibitied now in London calculated as described by experiment are these:
For the roller on the left side m = 8656,632(a2-a1)/z meter
For the roller on the right side m = 8655,983(a2-a1)/z meter
The roller on the right side gives a constant difference for the value"
13. "m with the roller on the left side equal 1,3252 meter. Respecting the correction of the apparatus, it is only necessary to make the axis of the rollers parallel with the direction of the movement on the disk M. In this parallel position this movement of course has no influence on the revolution of the rollers. The parallel position of the axis of the rollers may be tried by experiment, by moving them on the disk M, turning the disk C.
During this experiment the disk M of course must rest. No motion of the rollers will then be observed . It seems requisite , at first sight, the roller J must move thorugh the centre of the disk M. But this is not necessary; an approximation only would be useful solely according to practical motives. By a sidewards position no difference in the revolution of the rollers is effected. This is proved in the following way."
14. "As to the two positions I and II of the rollers it needs be shown, that a motion dq of the disk M causes the same effect.
In the situation I (sketch 4) the motion of the rollers is: pq =aDq
In the situation II the motion of the rollers is not equal nm, but equal to mo = nm cos(gamma-j)
Consequently cos(gamma-j)=a/a1 and nm a1Dq1 therefore:
mo = a1dqa/a1=aDq=pq
The motion of the rollers therefore in both situations is equal. Supposing a thorough mechanical exactness, there can be no cause for error in the instrument except th case described (page 3).
Finally it is to show how to fix in a manner corresponding to the very exact levelling and construction of the instrument the distance of the points from which the mean height is measured by the instrument to a point given by levelling.
For this purpose the height of a point P of the buoy over the water is carefully measured."
15 "This may be very exactly done by putting the buoy into a vessel filled with water. The buoy afterwards is lifted a little by the weight D. (fig 1) This is easy to calculate considering the area of the buoy, the weight D and the radius of of the disk C and E. The buoy then is fixed at a certain height by a wire O. In this situation the height of P beneath a point given by levelling is carefully measured. The absolute height of the water represented by the chosen position of the buoy is now known. After this the mean height corresponding to the same position (viz. the constant height of this position) is calucalted according to results for a number of 10 or more"
16. "revolutions of the disk M. If the measured height corresponding to the situation of the buoy be equal h and if the height given by the instrument be equal m, h-m is the absolute height (according to the levelling) from which the mean height given by the instrument is taken.
The diamond-point can then be fixed in a position to get a corresponding diagramm on the cylinder L to the absolute height given by levelling.
Hamburgh May 1876
FH Reitz
Civil Engineer in Hamburgh"

  
