Art of Judgement

I'll briefly present my ideas about AoJ for the future and the next round of visiting scholars , who, by then should have been selected. As a preliminary agenda I think we should also discuss:
- how AoJ affects our work
- ideas for future workshops ("planning as process"?)
- plans for cooperation.

Tried very very hard, but
how to involve postdocs?
we worked for the working group
What would you do?
DB not more formal demands
Joint book? not necessary
Does WG produce sthg?
Rejigging the whole thing. Do I want to redefine it and go somewhere else???
Make sure wkshp is something you really are interested in!!!
maintain rels over time: re-invite people?
involving postdocs

NL: malleability of the project
rewrite it!!! no need to stick to AoJ present incarnation
processes of making decisions: from little pea planning to big pea planning.
material production: that’s were AoJ comes from
making things work!
interest in threads of continuity in a world that focuses on change
  DB: role of legal dimension?
The art of judgement includes small decisions, like whether you have work for a certain person
  DB: difficulty in seein' how NL proj was exemplification of AoJ
  SVB: apprenticeship as class formation
    Judgements about what is modernity, true America.

NL: what needs to made be legible depends on very material things. 20th century science seems to have detached itself from these material things
DB: notion of altitude at which an aircraft is located. Three meanings of altitude: absolute, relative, local. Are there overlaps?
DB: mathematicians studied shape of the Earth. Marie Jalowicz Simon  "Gone to Ground" on sabotage in Nazi factories

another dimension of art of judgement: subversion and limitation of collective judgement
integrating power and the art of judgement

Ian Miller "The Nature of the Beasts: Empire and Exhibition at the Tokyo Imperial Zoo"

SVB controversies about what makes up art, how do they judge what constitutes art?: norms, categories, controversies
how is this process translated into policy-making. art as knowledge enactment: concepts of authenticity + tradition
Struggling with how to shape a second project: repetition of questions entertained in the first project

DB: impact of being part of the group, at very first meeting in Jan he had not been yet able to find a work on fatigue for German airforce. Got suggestion that research on pervitin done by Germans could be used as a comparative case study
